[None][doc] Blogpost for Helix Parallelism (#13547)
NVIDIA/TensorRT-LLM: docs/source/blogs/tech_blog/blog21_Helix_Parallelism_Scaling_Multi_Million_Token_Decoding_with_KV_Cache_Sharding.md

  - [Communication Volume Analysis](#communication-volume-analysis)
  - [FFN Phase: Rank Reprovisioning](#ffn-phase-rank-reprovisioning)
  - [Distributed KV Concatenation](#distributed-kv-concatenation)
- [Implementation in TensorRT-LLM](#implementation-in-tensorrt-llm)
  - [Configuration](#configuration)
  - [Model Integration](#model-integration)
  - [Request Handling for Helix](#request-handling-for-helix)
  - [KV Cache Management](#kv-cache-management)
  - [Custom Kernels](#custom-kernels)
  - [Composability](#composability)
- [When to Use Helix](#when-to-use-helix)
- [Performance Results: DeepSeek-R1 (MoE, MLA)](#performance-results-deepseek-r1-moe-mla)
- [Future Work](#future-work)
- [Acknowledgment](#acknowledgment)

## Introduction

Modern AI applications increasingly rely on models that combine large parameter counts with multi-million-token context windows. Whether it is AI agents following months of conversation, legal assistants reasoning through gigabytes of case law, or coding copilots navigating sprawling repositories, preserving long-range context is essential for relevance and coherence. On top of that, users expect fast, interactive responses.

> The growing demand to decode at this scale underscores the importance of FP4 compute and the high-bandwidth NVLink domain provided by NVIDIA Blackwell systems. **Helix Parallelism**, co-designed with Blackwell, addresses the two dominant bottlenecks in long-context decoding: KV cache streaming and FFN weight loading. It does so by temporally disaggregating the parallelism strategies used for attention and FFN within each transformer layer, allowing the same pool of GPUs to operate in the configuration best suited to each stage's bottleneck.

Reviewer: IMO using "temporally disaggregating" is a little confusing and can be misconstrued with AFD like approach.

I would state it more simply as:
It does so by using different parallelism strategies for attention and FFN ....

Author: Updated. https://github.com/NVIDIA/TensorRT-LLM/pull/13547/commits/4d854b6c178ddbedd4b931603e11a7ac44014d48

> The growing demand to decode at this scale underscores the importance of FP4 compute and the high-bandwidth NVLink domain provided by NVIDIA Blackwell systems. **Helix Parallelism**, co-designed with Blackwell, addresses the two dominant bottlenecks in long-context decoding: KV cache streaming and FFN weight loading. It does so by temporally disaggregating the parallelism strategies used for attention and FFN within each transformer layer, allowing the same pool of GPUs to operate in the configuration best suited to each stage's bottleneck.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
 **Helix Parallelism**, co-designed with Blackwell, addresses the two dominant bottlenecks in long-context decoding: KV cache streaming and FFN weight loading. It does so by using different parallelism strategies for attention and FFN within each transformer layer, allowing the same pool of GPUs to operate in the configuration best suited to each stage's bottleneck. In this blog, we focus on sequence parallelism for attention and tensor parallelism for FFN operations.
```

Reviewer 2: Suggest leaving out the first line - keep this more technical and less about promoting specific NVIDIA tech

Author: Updated. https://github.com/NVIDIA/TensorRT-LLM/pull/13547/commits/4d854b6c178ddbedd4b931603e11a7ac44014d48

## Decoding Bottlenecks at Scale

To support real-time decoding at scale, a system must overcome two major bottlenecks during the generation phase.

### KV Cache Streaming

When handling multi-million-token contexts, each GPU must read a massive history of past tokens (KV cache) from DRAM per sample at every decoding step. This constant streaming can saturate DRAM bandwidth, increase TTL, and quickly become a major bottleneck as context length grows.

Consider Tensor Parallelism (TP) as an example: increasing TP can distribute weight loading across more GPUs, but in attention schemes like Grouped Query Attention (GQA) or Multi-Latent Attention (MLA), multiple query heads share a limited number of KV heads K. When TP exceeds K, the system must **duplicate** the multi-million-token KV cache across GPUs so each shard can serve its assigned query heads. Beyond this point, increasing TP neither shrinks per-GPU KV cache size nor speeds up KV reads, imposing a hard ceiling on attention time and forcing smaller batch sizes under tight TTL constraints. In the case of MLA (used by DeepSeek models), K is effectively 1, so any TP > 1 triggers full KV duplication.

### FFN Weight Loading

> During autoregressive decoding, generating every new token requires loading large FFN weights from DRAM. With small batch sizes typical of latency-sensitive workloads, this cost cannot be amortized, making FFN weight reads a dominant source of latency. More TP helps here by splitting weights across GPUs, but the KV cache duplication ceiling from above limits how far TP can scale - if TP is capped at K shards, only K GPUs can be used to shard the FFN, which accounts for roughly two-thirds of model parameters.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
During autoregressive decoding, generating every new token requires loading large FFN weights from DRAM. With small batch sizes typical of latency-sensitive workloads, this cost cannot be amortized, making FFN weight reads a dominant source of latency. More TP helps here by splitting weights across GPUs, but the KV cache duplication ceiling from above limits how far TP can scale - if TP is capped at K shards, only K GPUs can be used to shard the FFN, which typically accounts for the vast majority of model parameters.
```

Author: Updated. https://github.com/NVIDIA/TensorRT-LLM/pull/13547/commits/4d854b6c178ddbedd4b931603e11a7ac44014d48

These two bottlenecks are difficult to optimize simultaneously using traditional parallelism strategies, because the optimal sharding for attention (minimize KV duplication, keep TP ≤ K) conflicts with the optimal sharding for FFN (maximize weight distribution, increase TP). Helix Parallelism resolves this conflict.

### Roofline Motivation

> The following roofline analysis illustrates why decoupling attention and FFN sharding is essential. We model a dense LLM with batch B=8, MLA attention, query heads Q=128, KV heads K=1, QK head size Hsz=576, V head size Hsz=512, and FFN dimension F=65536 running on GB200 NVLink72. Both weights and KV cache are stored and fetched in FP8. Communication overhead from TP and KVP is not included; these plots show only the change in GPU DRAM-read latency as TP width and KVP width vary.

Reviewer 2: Why these particular numbers? Are they representative of, say, DSR1 at TP=8?

Author: Yes, Sharan. Added a statement about this right above the roofline figures.

Author: Hi Sharan, the MLA-attention numbers are taken directly from DeepSeek-R1: 128 query heads, with the per-token KV cache being the latent vector (`kv_lora_rank=512` plus `qk_rope_head_dim=64`, giving the QK head size of 576). But, FFN size in DSR1 is 18432.

I believe the FFN dimension of 65536 is intentionally chosen as a representative large dense FFN width so that FFN weight-read time is on the same order as long-context attention reads and the bottleneck crossover is visible in a single plot.

Reviewer 2: Yeah would be good to state that for context. Else those numbers look arbitrary.

Author: Done! https://github.com/NVIDIA/TensorRT-LLM/pull/13547/commits/440d8d24350e51d7f97628021dfe18b016e66c0e

<div align="center">
<figure>
  <img src="../media/tech_blog21_roofline_analysis.png" alt="Roofline analysis for KV cache and Linear weight reads" width="1000">
</figure>
</div>
<p align="center"><sub><em>Figure 1. Roofline analysis for KV cache and Linear weight reads on GB200 NVLink72. (Left) DRAM read latency vs. TP width - benefits plateau beyond TP=K due to full KV duplication, highlighting the need for KV sharding in Helix. (Middle) DRAM read time vs. KV length S - self-attention cost scales linearly with S, eventually dominating latency. (Right) DRAM read time vs. KVP width - Helix applies KVP in attention to reduce per-GPU memory traffic and achieve linear scaling, enabling multi-million-token inference.</em></sub></p>

The key insights from this analysis:

- **(Left)** Increasing TP beyond K yields diminishing returns for attention because KV cache must be duplicated, while FFN weight reads continue to benefit linearly from more TP. This divergence motivates using different parallelism widths for the two stages.
- **(Middle)** Self-attention DRAM read time scales linearly with KV sequence length S at fixed TP. At 1M+ tokens, attention reads dominate total layer latency.

> - **(Right)** KV Parallelism (KVP) distributes KV cache reads across GPUs, achieving linear scaling of attention time with KVP width. The same GPUs are then re-provisioned for TP in FFNs to reduce weight-read latency.

Reviewer: you could expand this to EP and or TP instead of limiting it to TP only to make it more relevant to current models

Author: Updated. https://github.com/NVIDIA/TensorRT-LLM/pull/13547/commits/4d854b6c178ddbedd4b931603e11a7ac44014d48

## How Helix Works

### High-Level Execution Flow

> Helix is a hybrid sharding strategy that temporally disaggregates the parallelism strategies of attention and FFN within a single transformer layer. Instead of using one fixed parallelism configuration for the entire layer, Helix switches between two configurations using the same pool of N GPUs:

Reviewer: see note in prev comment about using "temporally disaggregates"

Author: Updated. https://github.com/NVIDIA/TensorRT-LLM/pull/13547/commits/4d854b6c178ddbedd4b931603e11a7ac44014d48

### Exact Attention via Log-Sum-Exp Rescaling

After local FlashAttention, each KVP GPU holds a **partial** attention output computed over only its KV shard, along with the corresponding log-sum-exp (LSE) scalar per query token. A single **All-to-All along the query-head dimension** across KVP GPUs exchanges these partial outputs and LSE values.

Each GPU then rescales and sums the received fragments to reconstruct the **exact** softmax-normalized attention - not an approximation. The correction works because:

1. Each KVP rank i computes local attention output O_i = softmax(Q · K_i^T) · V_i and the corresponding log-sum-exp LSE_i
2. After the All-to-All, each GPU has all partial outputs {O_i} and scalars {LSE_i}
3. The global result is reconstructed as: O = Σ_i (exp(LSE_i - LSE_global) · O_i), where LSE_global = log(Σ_i exp(LSE_i))

> This is the same online softmax correction used in [Flash-Decoding](https://crfm.stanford.edu/2023/10/12/flashdecoding.html), extended to a distributed setting. The result is mathematically identical to single-GPU attention.

Reviewer: Might want to add that each GPU does it's own flash-decode across SM. so in essence this is a hierarchical flash-decode technique, first level within the GPU and then distributed across GPUs

Author: Updated. https://github.com/NVIDIA/TensorRT-LLM/pull/13547/commits/4d854b6c178ddbedd4b931603e11a7ac44014d48

  - [Custom Kernels](#custom-kernels)
  - [Composability](#composability)
- [When to Use Helix](#when-to-use-helix)
- [Performance Results: DeepSeek-R1 (MoE, MLA)](#performance-results-deepseek-r1-moe-mla)
- [Future Work](#future-work)
- [Acknowledgment](#acknowledgment)

## Introduction

Modern AI applications increasingly rely on models that combine large parameter counts with multi-million-token context windows. Whether it is AI agents following months of conversation, legal assistants reasoning through gigabytes of case law, or coding copilots navigating sprawling repositories, preserving long-range context is essential for relevance and coherence. At the same time, users expect fast, interactive responses.

Helix Parallelism addresses the two dominant bottlenecks in long-context decoding: KV cache streaming and FFN weight loading. It does so by using different parallelism strategies for attention and FFN within each transformer layer, allowing the same pool of GPUs to operate in the configuration best suited to each stage's bottleneck. In this blog, we focus on sequence parallelism for attention and tensor parallelism (with optional expert parallelism for MoE) for the FFN.

> Compared to conventional parallelism approaches, Helix delivers up to **32x** concurrency improvement and **1.8x** interactivity improvement for 1M sequence length on DeepSeek-R1 with GB300 silicon NVL72, pushing forward the throughput-latency Pareto frontier and making real-time inference with ultra-long sequences practical.

Reviewer 3: Is this silicon or simulated?

Reviewer 3: Should put out silicon data at this point

Author: This is silicon.
